fix(api-reference): add missing info, types and `<Since />` (#8943)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/reference/api-reference.mdx

> export interface MarkdownInstance<T extends Record<string, any>> {

Reviewer: I’m wondering if we should mention `MarkdownInstance` in the introductory line above. Currently there are no search results for it because code samples are excluded from indexing.

For example something like

> Markdown files loaded with `Astro.glob()` return the following `MarkdownInstance` interface:

  /* Any data specified in this file's YAML frontmatter */
	frontmatter: T;
  /* The absolute file path of this file */
	file: string;
  /* The rendered path of this file */
	url: string | undefined;
  /* Astro Component that renders the contents of this file */

> 	Content: AstroComponent;

Author: I hesitated to update this type (I believe it is present elsewhere as well). `AstroComponent` does not exist, the real type is `AstroComponentFactory`. Should I update all the occurrences or has the type been simplified for documentation purposes?

Reviewer: I think using the accurate name is not a bad idea. Admittedly `AstroComponentFactory` is not a type we really document, so either way it doesn’t matter **_too_** much, but might as well use the same name we use in the code base in case anyone does want to search for it.

  /** Raw Markdown file content, excluding layout HTML and YAML frontmatter */
	rawContent(): string;
  /** Markdown file compiled to HTML, excluding layout HTML */

> 	compiledContent(): string;

Reviewer: I believe these are only available for Markdown but **not** MDX. Do you think that should be mentioned here?

Similar to in the Markdown docs: https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/markdown-content/#exported-properties

Author: Indeed, they are only available for Markdown. I had hesitated to add them but since this is `MarkdownInstance` and not `MDXInstance` I figured they should appear. But a `Markdown only` comment makes perfect sense!

<p><Since v="1.4.0" /></p>

**Type:** `AstroCookies`

`Astro.cookies` contains utilities for reading and manipulating cookies in [server-side rendering](/en/guides/server-side-rendering/) mode.

##### `get`

<p>

> **Type:** `(key: string, options?: CookieGetOptions) => AstroCookie | undefined`

Author: The real type is `AstroCookieGetOptions`. Was the type renamed at some point (I couldn't find a reference) or was it to shorten the type declared in the documentation? (I found other examples where the `Astro` prefix is ​​missing)

Reviewer: Again, I would say let’s use the full name. Very probable something was renamed and these docs were never updated.

Once a cookie is "deleted" (expired), `Astro.cookies.has()` will return `false` and `Astro.cookies.get()` will return an [`AstroCookie`](#astrocookie) with a `value` of `undefined`. Options available when deleting a cookie are: `domain`, `path`, `httpOnly`, `sameSite`, and `secure`.

##### `merge`

<p>
**Type:** `(cookies: AstroCookies) => void`
</p>

> Merges a new `AstroCookies` instance into the current instance. Any new cookies will be added to the current instance, overwriting any existing cookies with the same name.

Reviewer: I think this probably needs an “and” to separate the two clauses as it is not the _new_ cookies that overwrite, but only the ones matching existing cookies.

```suggestion
Merges a new `AstroCookies` instance into the current instance. Any new cookies will be added to the current instance and any cookies with the same name will overwrite existing values.
```

---
```

### `Astro.canonicalURL`

:::caution[Deprecated]
Use [`Astro.url`](#astrourl) to construct your own canonical URL. 
:::

The [canonical URL][canonical] of the current page.

> 

Reviewer: A note on this: we probably kept this around because there were some links to the `#astrocanonicalurl` heading slug. That said, I don’t think it’s still needed, because as you noted it was removed more than a year ago.

If we wanted to be responsible, we _could_ add a redirect for this case to `public/_redirects`:
```
/:lang:/reference/api-reference/#astrocanonicalurl   /:lang:/reference/api-reference/#astrourl
```

Author: The documentation doesn't seems to link to this section anymore, but external resources might so the redirection makes sense! I'll add it.

#### `schema`

> **Type:** `TSchema extends ZodType | (context: SchemaContext) => TSchema extends ZodType`

Author: I wasn't sure how to update this type. Is `TSchema extends ZodType` really meaningful for someone new to Astro (or Typescript)? Reading this, it seems weird to me since the other types are usable while here, it is an indication for those who understand Typescript. Even if it's not a real type, shouldn't we just stick to `ZodType`?

```
`ZodType | (context: SchemaContext) => ZodType`
```

Reviewer: Yes, I think your suggestion makes sense!

By the way, not required, but something we’ve done in the Starlight docs is actually link type definitions when we have them, i.e. here it might be:

```suggestion
**Type:** <code>ZodType | (context: <a href="#schemacontext">SchemaContext</a>) => ZodType</code>
```

Author: Nice idea, this can be useful to better understand the return type! I'll check the other types (I'm thinking in particular of `AstroCookie` ).

### `getEntry()`

<p>

**Types:**
- `(collection: string, contentSlugOrDataId: string) => CollectionEntry<collection>`
- `({ collection: string, id: string }) => CollectionEntry<collection>`
- `({ collection: string, slug: string }) => CollectionEntry<collection>`
<Since v="2.5.0" />

> </p>

Author: I'm not sure about this one. Since we have a list of types the rendering might seem odd. I tried to place `<Since />` before `Types:` but we have a new line between the two. I think the Markdown parser ignores the `<p>` tag around because of the list inside. So I'm not sure what is the best option here.

Reviewer: Oh boy, yes, had no idea we’d allowed someone to have function overloads like this 😅 

I _think_ it might look ok if `<Since>` appears first in this case?

<img width="753" alt="getEntry docs with added in version displayed above the list of valid types" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dfc0ef73-181c-4148-b9d5-b6e7c57ee5c3">

Author: I felt like the spacing was bigger when I tried... I must have tested too quickly. So yes, it seems to be the best option when using multiple types!

Author: It seems I'm struggling with this one. In all my tests, `Types:` is always rendered in its own `<p>` tag. So the spacing does not match your screenshot.

For example, the following should render both in a single `<p>` tag, but no... `Types:` is stubborn 😬 and has is own `<p>` tag in the end.

```mdx
<p>

<Since v="2.5.0" />
**Types:**
</p>
```

@delucis It was a live edit for your screenshot? The best I got is:

![Illustration of the too important spacing between since and types](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6fc2574a-21b9-4032-a4a3-80c6840442bd)

Is there any other trick I don't know about Markdown rendering? 😅 (Thanks by the way for the new line explanation! Erika had already told me about it for the MD images inside `figure`... but I'm not used to this syntax so I had forgotten... 👀 )

### `getEntries()`

<p>

**Types:**
- `(Array<{ collection: string, id: string }>) => Array<CollectionEntry<collection>>`
- `(Array<{ collection: string, slug: string }>) => Array<CollectionEntry<collection>>`
<Since v="2.5.0" />

> </p>

Author: Like above: I'm not sure about this one. Since we have a list of types the rendering might seem odd. I tried to place `<Since />` before `Types:` but we have a new line between the two. I think the Markdown parser ignores the `<p>` tag around because of the list inside. So I'm not sure what is the best option here.

Reviewer: Ah, regarding the list nesting, we might need to use HTML for the whole markup potentially? Which is a bit painful. If indeed `<ul>` is valid inside `<p>`. I think so, but let me double check.

Author: @delucis https://caninclude.glitch.me/caninclude?child=ul&parent=p It seems we cannot do this. 🫤

Reviewer: No, `<ul>` is indeed not valid inside a `<p>`, which should only contain phrasing content. Given this, maybe it’s best to flip the order but still not squash everything together into a single paragraph so spacing is consistent.

### `onRequest()`

**Type:** `(context: APIContext, next: MiddlewareNext) => Promise<Response> | Response | Promise<void> | void`

> A required exported function from `src/middleware.js` that will be called before rendering every page or API route. It accepts two optional arguments: [context](#context) and [next()](#next). `onRequest()` must return a `Response`: either directly, or by calling `next()`.

Reviewer: Small nit regarding the initial wording here:

```suggestion
A required exported function from `src/middleware.js` that will be called before rendering every page or API route. It receives two arguments: [context](#context) and [next()](#next). `onRequest()` must return a `Response`: either directly, or by calling `next()`.
```

Astro always passes the arguments to `onRequest` so they are not “optional arguments”. Whether a user uses them or not is up to them, but they will always be present if they do need them.

> ### `next()`

Reviewer: I wonder if this should be nested under `onRequest()` given it is an argument of that function?

```suggestion
#### `next()`
```

Author: I checked the history, it seems there is no particular reason for `next()` being at the same level. So I think we can safely move it under `onRequest`. However, it might seem strange to have only one subtitle in the section...

Reviewer: > it might seem strange to have only one subtitle in the section...

I think it’s OK. There is a question about why `context` doesn’t also have a heading maybe?

Author: I guess it was tricky since the context object is already described above in `Endpoint contexts`. However, having two subheadings (one for `context` and another for `next()`) since seems preferable to me to avoid an isolated heading (`next()`). Maybe we could use something like:

![An example of context and next function as subheading of onRequest](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/428aa22f-0897-4a05-9486-5a0ab2c2835c)

**Note:** I didn't check if `Since` could be applied to `context`, this is just an example.

Reviewer: I like that a lot! And I don’t _think_ we need a `<Since>` for `context` as it was always available in middleware so covered by the main middleware one (and the availability of individual properties should be documented in the endpoint docs you linked to).

(I still don’t think we should display “Added in” in the heading for `next()`, but I guess that was not the point of this screenshot.)

<p>

**Type:** `(rewritePayload?: string | URL | Request) => Promise<Response>`<br />

> <Since v="4.13.0" />

Reviewer: This one is a bit tricky. There has _always_ been a `next()` since middleware was first added, but the extra `rewritePayload` argument you can pass to it is new since `4.13.0` not quite sure how best to handle this situation. Might make most sense to move the mention inline with the final part about the `rewritePayload` instead of including it here?

Author: Ah this one is my fault! It's [currently as you describe](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/api-reference/#next), I haven't checked the history of the argument so I've pulled the information up so it's like the other sections. I'll revert this change!

</p>

A function that intercepts (reads and modifies) the `Response` of a `Request` or calls the "next" middleware in the chain and returns a `Response`. For example, this function could modify the HTML body of a response.

This is an optional argument of `onRequest()`, and may provide the required `Response` returned by the middleware.

> It accepts an optional URL path parameter in the form of a string, `URL`, or `Request` to [rewrite](/en/guides/routing/#rewrites) the current request without retriggering a new rendering phase.

Reviewer: i.e. something like this:

```suggestion
Since Astro v4.13.0, `next()` accepts an optional URL path parameter in the form of a string, `URL`, or `Request` to [rewrite](/en/guides/routing/#rewrites) the current request without retriggering a new rendering phase.
```

Author: I didn't read your suggestion before answering to the other comment. This suggestion seems better if we want to keep consistency with the other sections. The [current `Added in:`/`Type:` in the middle of the section](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/api-reference/#next) seems a little odd.

So should I revert my changes or we use your suggestion?

Reviewer: I think I like my suggestion 😄 

I agree with you that it’s weird to have the “Added in” in the middle of the paragraph — and even weirder to have the type there. It makes it kind of unclear what is being referred to.

Alternatively, the current style could maybe make more sense with a subheading?

<img width="756" alt="next() API reference section with separate heading for next(requestPayload)" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3fbc00f3-81fb-4767-aabe-ac6557ba872c">

But I think this overcomplicates things. Keeping the type clearly up top is preferable in my opinion.

Author: Hum it could be confusing for users I think. They might think that the two are unrelated. I prefer your first suggestion and I think it's better to remove `Since` here. Usually `Since` applies to the section and not the parameter, so something like:

![Example of the restructured next() section](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8e665540-0e40-481f-8821-41dd1d565cc3)

Author: I just realized that this is exactly what you are suggesting when combined with the comment on `Since`. (I must be tired 😅)  So yes, I'm okay with those changes!

};
```

#### `context`

<p>

**Type:** `APIContext`
</p>

The first argument of `onRequest()` is a context object. It mirrors many of the `Astro` global properties.

<ReadMore>See [Endpoint contexts](#endpoint-context) for more information about the context object.</ReadMore>

#### `next()`

<p>

**Type:** `(rewritePayload?: string | URL | Request) => Promise<Response>`<br />
</p>

> A function that intercepts (reads and modifies) the `Response` of a `Request` or calls the "next" middleware in the chain and returns a `Response`. For example, this function could modify the HTML body of a response.
> 
> This is an optional argument of `onRequest()`, and may provide the required `Response` returned by the middleware.

Reviewer: Not changed in this PR, but taking advantage to suggest some changes as I don’t think this is particularly clear or accurate. This proposal also aligns  the phrasing a bit with the new `context` docs.

```suggestion
The second argument of `onRequest()` is a function that calls all the subsequent middleware in the chain and returns a `Response`. For example, other middleware could modify the HTML body of a response and awaiting the result of `next()` would allow your middleware to respond to those changes.
```
